
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Network Analysis: A comparative Analysis of Centrality Measures for the Brain Subregions of two Populations of Prairie Voles

<!-- badges: start -->

<!-- badges: end -->

## Background

Translational research involving animals offers a great opportunity for
understanding human behaviors that would otherwise be impossible through
a direct study conducted on humans. However, the success of
translational research depends largely on the use of appropriate animal
models since typical laboratory animals do not exhibit much of the
complex social behaviors observed in humans. This is where the prairie
vole (Microtus ochrogaster) comes in handy as it has been found to
provide an extraordinary animal model that can be used to study several
aspects of social cognition, because they establish long-term socially
monogamous relationships with mates, provide biparental care and in
natural habitats, alloparental behavior is commonly observed. The
prairie vole model has already contributed to the better understanding
of the neurobiology and genetics of social bonding, parental care,
social buffering, the effects of early life experience in later social
behavior and social related depression (Ortiz et al., 2018).

## Objective

Utilizing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data from
culturally and behaviorally distinct populations of prairie voles
generated by Ortiz et al. (2021), this report conducts a statistical
comparison of each of the centrality measures (degree, closeness,
betweenness, eigenvector centrality), comparing the two populations of
voles (IL and KI). IL and KI denote the prairie male voles from Illinois
and male cross-breed off-springs of Kansas dam and Illinois sires,
respectively. The goal is to determine if the two populations of prairie
voles exhibit any significant differences in prosocial behavior evident
from differences in the centrality measures for particular subregions of
the brain networks.

<!-- Ortiz et. al (2021) found Illinois prairie males to be more sociable than KI males and differential connectivity accounts for differential expression of prosociality and aggression, I hypothesized that differences in some of the centrality measures for the midbrain subregion will definitely be observed. -->

<!-- ## Task:  -->

<!-- conduct a statistical comparison of each of the centrality measures (degree, closeness, betweenness, eigenvector centrality), comparing the two populations of voles (IL and KI). Use proper statistical methodology and terminology. Justify your statistical approach by citing relevant assumptions, parametric assumptions, or violations. Visualize the graph effectively to make the information as easy to read as possible. -->

## Source of data and data description

The data were provided by Richard J. Ortiz, a Research Technician at the
Department of Biological Sciences at UTEP, as an excel workbook
consisting of three main sheets relevant to our analysis. First sheet
contains IL voles brain network data in the form of an adjacency matrix
with 111 nodes produced using a vole-specific atlas. The second sheet
contains similar data for the KI voles whiles the third provides a list
of all nodes which are the region of interest (ROIs) and their
corresponding subregions. Edges in the network data are weighted by the
absolute Pearson’s correlation coefficients across all node pairs where
a **2.3** threshold was used to avoid weak node connections and zero
means no connection between any two pairs of nodes.

The various results obtained in this report are highly reproducible not
only for the `midbrain` subregion but for all the other subregions as
well; first because all the R codes generating the results are placed
side-by-side with the report documentation in an accompanying RMarkdown
file, and second via an online web application where the user can
interact with to see real time results. To replicate the results for any
other subregion, simply provide the name of the particular subregion
under the `Global settings` at the beginning of the RMarkdown file.
Alternatively, just select any subregion on the online web application.
Below is a link to the online web application:

> <https://william-agyapong.shinyapps.io/vbna/>

All statistical analyses and visualizations were done in the R
statistical software.

# Refernces

  - Ashtiani, M., Salehzadeh-Yazdi, A., Razaghi-Moghadam, Z., Hennig,
    H., Wolkenhauer, O., Mirzaie, M., & Jafari, M. (2017). A systematic
    survey of centrality measures for protein-protein interaction
    networks. bioRxiv, 149492.

  - Richard J. Ortiz, Amy E. Wagler, Jason R. Yee, Praveen P. Kulkarni,
    Xuezhu Cai, Craig F. Ferris, Bruce S. Cushing, Functional
    connectivity differences between two culturally distinct prairie
    vole populations: insights into the prosocial network, Biological
    Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 2021, ISSN
    2451-9022, <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpsc.2021.11.007>.
    (<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2451902221003207>)

  - Ortiz, J.J., Portillo, W., Paredes, R.G. et al. Resting state brain
    networks in the prairie vole. Sci Rep 8, 1231 (2018).
    <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-17610-9>

  - Network Analysis in R by Dai Shizuka:
    <https://dshizuka.github.io/networkanalysis/tutorials.html>

  - Centrality measures:
    <https://cambridge-intelligence.com/keylines-faqs-social-network-analysis/>

  - <https://bookdown.org/markhoff/social_network_analysis/your-first-network.html>

  - <https://kateto.net/netscix2016.html>
